sometimes people have
specific demands for political progress
they want to make a difference in the
world they want to make a change and
they go back
and re-examine history for that reason
they find themselves
mining history sifting through
historical factoids to find bits and
pieces of the truth
that will suit their agenda today and
sometimes
people just go back and re-examine and
rewrite history
and they end up finding formally
neglected
unknown or forgotten aspects of
important truth
that lead to instigate or inspire
new movements for political change
i think this is one of the most exciting
interesting and important political
developments to talk about in the
writing and rewriting of history
um because nobody knows nobody knows
what its significance is going to be
what are we going to call what are we
going to call this
new tendency in american history and the
understanding the american constitution
i i sent this guy an email
woody holton asking about the authors of
these two books michael clareton
woody holton himself another guy named
george willem van cleeve i said look
when you put these scholars together you
look at this kind of
new generation of historians
really rewriting the history of what
happened to american constitution and
why it matters what it means today
you know what are you gonna what are you
gonna call this movement now i'll say to
you
i didn't say this to him you could say
what do you call this the constitution
is bad
you have a nation of hundreds of
millions of people who are raised from
birth to believe the constitution is the
best
and the greatest thing not just in
america but in the history of the world
they really do they they look with near
religious
reverence on the history of the american
constitution and on its present function
and significance in the world today
and you have a bunch of ph.d laden
scholars rewriting that history
and exposing it for what it is well what
are we going to call this the debunking
the constitution
didn't say that i said to him look this
is you know this kind of breathtaking
new generation of historical scholarship
coming out
in the shadow of the very strange
precedent
of what charles beard published fully
100 years ago
i'll say more about that in a minute
what are we going to call this we're
going to call this the post-beard
movement in history the anti-beardists
you know what is it you know because in
many ways what they're doing now is
correcting and contradicting
what charles beard wrote a hundred years
ago even though the tendency
began with him and he did send me back a
couple
couple very interesting replies i got
from this author and he joked he said
well we could we can call them the clean
shavens
is it the clean shaven scholars of uh
american constitutional history my own
autobiography plugs into the story in a
peculiar way
there was a time when i was young hard
to imagine but stick with me there was a
time when i was young back around say
i was in university myself and i can
remember face-to-face
verbally insisting on this kind of
analysis of the american constitution
with friends and colleagues of mine i
remember one guy who was a colleague in
the green party it was involved in
ecological baltics back then and
uh city hall municipal level democracy
rather than federal
um for various reasons wanting to make a
difference in the world wanting to make
a difference i could see
and not wanting to do fundraising for
somebody else's election which won't
make any difference in the world one way
or the other
so it was involved in local politics
ecological politics and i remember
talking to this guy and and saying to
him look you know
what you don't realize is that the
declaration of independence
is one thing and the writing of the
constitution
is another and the years in between
really matter and united states of
america existed in those years in
between
without the american constitution and
when you contrast the way
the american government worked before
the constitution the way it worked after
it reveals a whole lot about why the
united states is
the way it is now there's a lot to
unpack here i mean one of these books
alone is 880 pages
and each page is rather large um
there's a lot more to say about it than
that but sure
you can dumb this down and say look this
is a new school of thought
that says constitution bad
the title of this book is the framers
coup
charles beard over a hundred years ago
planted this seed
set out this idea in in beards beard's
perspective was
that the united states already had a
very robust
very inspiring democracy before the
constitution
and that what the constitution
represented was a kind of elite
anti-democratic conspiracy to make the
united states of america
less democratic than it was to have a
kind of takeover
of the slave owning class the
investor class the people who own
certain types of
savings bonds that they wanted to get
redeemed that it was a conspiracy having
to do with making america easier to
invest in
especially for british entrepreneurs
british portfolio
there was a series of very specific uh
kind of corporate
interests we could say in today's
problems there were specific financial
interests of a specific agenda by
members of an economic elite
and that there was real fear um
created by a number of again in sort of
charles beards
parlance or from his perspective uh the
sincere
unpredictable democratic nature of the
united states in its first few decades
was terrifying to people who were
members of that elite
now i've already sort of hinted these
guys these guys are not fools
um the picture you'll get just from this
one book alone from woody holton
is a much more nuanced meaningful
view than that but already with charles
beard
again fully 100 years ago what we have
is the suggestion of a sort of
utterly non-marxist
class analysis of colonial america you
know
that there were different social classes
with different particular
economic interests obviously slave
owners are a very different social class
from slaves well you know when you
really get into it
the people who actually fought in the
revolution people who were veterans of
the revolutionary war
they formed a distinctive social class
under themselves uh to some extent
the people who would benefit from having
peace
with the spanish empire were a very
different social class
the people who would benefit from being
at perpetual war with the spanish empire
and expanding
when you start to look at uh segment by
segment of the population
who wanted what who was it who wanted to
remain
strictly on a gold standard really gold
and silver
hard metals standard and who was it who
wanted to make a transition to paper
money
this is one of the most intensely
contested debates today
who wanted a permanent standing army and
who didn't who wanted a bill of rights
and who didn't
um there was this idea
planted at least at the elite levels of
academia over 100 years ago by charles
beard that this kind of analysis
could bring about something really
revelatory that this could really reveal
to us
why the united states functions the way
that it does today and from beard's
perspective what went
tragically wrong when you know the
constitution was written so again
this title is kind of click bait the
framers coup
the idea that the writing of the
constitution was itself
an elite coup d'etat now
um there were many things charles beard
was fundamentally
wrong about and i think
one of the most profound changes in the
writing of history um which will now
influence the way we do politics
in the present tense and going forward
is just the greater ease
of access to historical documents so
really briefly i used to be a scholar of
theravada buddhism that's the orthodox
school of buddhism a school of buddhism
that's very much based on a textual
corpus
so this textual corpus is much bigger
than the bible it fills a couple of
library shelves it's a whole bunch of
ancient texts
that a hundred years ago were really
hard to leave through and find what
you're looking for even if you have an
index
there may be no index there may be
handwritten manuscripts you're working
with whatever your
scenario is right well guess what you
take those two library shelves
full of books you digitize them you put
them on a cd-rom or you put them on the
internet you can hit
control f on your keyboard and you can
really rapidly find
every single time the word masturbation
is mentioned in those ancient sacred
texts
you can find every single time the word
slave and slavery are mentioned those
texts
things that used to be debatable and
wrapped in a sort of
um haze of cognitive dissonance and
voluntary ignorance
the difficulty of being well who can
really say exactly what the position of
the buddha was on slavery
yeah well guess what now anyone anyone
can hit control f they can go through
and read every single passage
to mention slavery and they can draw
their own conclusions something similar
has happened in the hundred years since
charles beard
was the influential person in this field
in that that haze
the haze of voluntary drugs and
cognitive dissonance
started to disappear um the enormous
corpus
of texts left that are either directly
or indirectly
connected to uh you know the writing of
the constitution federalist papers
anti-federalist papers
which includes personal letters between
these people that were preserved in
archives and museums
not just strictly uh legal documents
like hansards records of formal debates
or what have you
uh newspaper articles i mean what
the extent to which this guy went
through the archives what he went
through the archives
and mined examples of every
possible political and economic
perspective that were published in the
letters to the editor of
newspapers at the time it's brilliant
it's it's
really useful but the fact that he can
access those things now in a split
second
as opposed to actually leafing through
uh paper records
that is transforming the way we
understood the past
and it's gonna transform the decisions
we make in the the present and and how
we look at the future
so the most fundamental misconception
that charles beard
propounded or popularized was that
everything in the united states of
america was going great everything was
just fine
before the writing of the constitution
before the elites organized
this coup d'etat as he might put it or
is the title of this book was it
that somehow the united states had this
vibrant wonderful democracy that was an
inspiration
for example in europe but you know
around the world this was this exciting
new idea again
ideals espoused in the declaration of
independence
and writings from thomas paine and
things that are prior to
the negotiated negotiations constitution
and that then there was this kind of
dimming of that optimism as this uh
overtly elitist anti-democratic
republican tradition
took over with writing constitution well
the most basic premise there
that everything was fine
the new generation of scholars are
proving that utterly wrong
the united states was a deeply
dysfunctional
democracy in the years prior to the
constitution
there were very serious and you could
say insoluble problems that were tearing
the country
apart and you know you can
in examining this history you get to
question to what extent
your own values are on the side of
elitism and to what a side
to what extent you sympathize with the
the populists or the
so-called democrats in this situation
okay well probably everyone in this
audience
would say that they believe in democracy
taxes are unpopular people don't want to
pay taxes
some people are literally willing to
kill the tax collectors
rather than pay taxes do you send in the
army
to force them to pay taxes you know
again this is a simplification you can
get the version that's in 800 pages the
version that's in 400 pages
you can read this history for yourself
but
if you don't come to these books with
some kind of fundamentally
anarchic view that armies don't have any
business to
existing that the government has no
business collecting taxes to maintain a
navy
that the government shouldn't be able to
negotiate a peace treaty
with the french and the spanish like the
most
basic suppositions about government
competence and what it will take to
sustain
a professional government service of
that kind that is really what's being
questioned and called into debate in
that in that period and
you can definitely say that the
pre-constitutional period was based on a
reckless optimism that the united states
is going to be able to have all of the
advantages
they had grown accustomed to under the
british empire without any of the
disadvantages
right and what they found instead was
this is not surprising at all they were
suddenly
cut off from the economy of the british
empire both in terms of importing and
exporting
is that suddenly they were paying much
much higher taxes
and they were getting much much less in
return before they paid
taxes to the british empire but they got
the british
navy british army they were part of a
world spanning
empire they would farm tobacco and they
would be able to export their tobacco
not just
east to europe but south to the
caribbean and they would import
rum in return and so on the the
economics
of the united states of america oh and
this is this is not even getting into my
my favorite topic
all of this is linked to the
consternation and terror of
paper money so this is something
captured in a fascinating way by
by holton in his book what americans
felt in these few years
in between achieving independence and
before writing the constitution
was that they had paper money that was
reliable
under the british empire that was
something the british empire was capable
of doing
but that their own attempts to have an
independent paper currency had failed
and would continue to be a failure and
couldn't be trusted
they were in a situation where they were
adjacent to the spanish empire
that was still very successfully based
on silver coinage
the fabled pieces of eight that you
might have heard of
in uh pirate stories of the of the time
and on the other side of course they had
the remnant of the british empire
in what would later become canada quebec
etc
they had they were surrounded by empires
that had working currencies
and the united states america when it
achieved independence
not only was its own economy decimated
by being cutting off by being suddenly
cut off from
precisely the network of world trade
they had relied on before
but also they suddenly had no working
currency system
and again how much do you believe in
democracy do you believe that the
government should just have the right to
create money and force enough people
create the terms for
uh debt repayment government bonds and
so on and ultimately rely on military
force
to say to people look these are the
financial conditions of your life
whether you like it or not
or do you believe in the kind of really
chaotic anarchic democracy that existed
before
the constitution where you know
people were able to just physically shut
down courthouses
they were able to go and through
violence just just because it wasn't
popular they were able to
both through their vote and through mob
violence
prevent the most you know basic
functions of the state uh on a
day-to-day basis
including crucially tax collection debt
repayment
maintaining of armies uh so on and so
forth okay
so there's been a kind of profound
maturation
of the charles beard hypothesis right so
if you say 100 years ago
charles beard was saying the
constitution
cannot be understood
as the pinnacle of democratic
achievement it has to be understood as a
counter-democratic anti-democratic
movement
brought about by certain very definite
elites now
at that level of generalization this
new generation of books coming out is
affirming
charles beard's hypothesis however um
beard
without being a marxist he engaged in
this type of social class analysis very
clearly to try to vilify
the elite classes to say well they were
wrong and this is bad and evil
and he's also claiming that there really
was no crisis there was no crisis to be
solved that this was all done kind of
with
bad intentions the new generation of
scholarship
is instead revealing well there was a
crisis there was a very real crisis
there were tremendously important
problems to be solved and on
many issues many those
evil corrupt elites were correct there's
no point vilifying them as as evil
people can be members of an economic
elite and still be correct that the
government needs to collect taxes the
government needs to pay its debts
that ultimately um you can't have a form
of democracy in which people can
vote the state into bankruptcy that
there's going to be some
measure of oppression including the
oppression involved in creating paper
money
all these things that today we take for
granted but what comes out of that today
i've googled around a lot for reviews of
these books the two have
shown you on camera george william van
cleaves 2019 publication a couple of
other books that are part of this new
generation of scholarship and it's fair
to say in 2021
that the formal academic book review is
dead and
even the formal newspaper book review is
dead
but what you find instead are a lot of
sincere
informal emotional reactions to these
books posted
on the internet um sometimes from people
with phds
you know really some of them were from
career academics some of them just from
members of the public
at various levels of area edition and
engagement
and what i saw again and again was
people asking
what are we supposed to believe now what
are we supposed to do
now i'm not american i'm canadian
and as has been mentioned when i was a
very young man
because of my own reading my own
research i was already kind of
very biased in favor of this approach
to understanding the american
constitution both in how it was written
why it's written the way it is why does
the advantage the disadvantages
very fundamentally people are being
asked to shift from having an almost
religious reverence for the constitution
as a document that was written to rule
over all humanity in all times in all
places forever that it was this perfect
achievement defining democracy
that should last basically should remain
unchanged for centuries thereafter
and instead they're being led to a view
of it which
apart from the class analysis apart from
the questions of the elites versus
democracy
etc etc interesting in itself
instead you're led to have a view of the
constitution
as a very messy series
of short-term solutions to short-term
problems that barely made sense
barely at the time the constitution was
written
and that rapidly became revealed to be
complete nonsense
to be a terrible way to govern a country
within just one century after it was
written you
switch from viewing the united states as
a country with
amazing achievements and an impressive
culture impressive economy and
impressive empire even shall we say
you switch from viewing the american
empire
as something that is great because of
its constitution
to instead viewing it as something that
has been great
despite its constitution this is the
year 2021.
let me just ask you what does it say in
the constitution about
police brutality
it's easy to complain police brutality
is terrible in the united states america
today all right
what if i tell you that everything
that's good about policing
in the united states of america is not
because of the constitution
it's despite the constitution doing this
kind of reading
whether you're looking at the military
the civilian the judicial
aspect the functioning of congress the
reality is we're people who have
modern expectations of what democracy is
supposed to be
and we look for this system created with
a series of very strange
short-term compromises and stop-gap
measures
we look for it to satisfy or live up to
those expectations when the system
itself
the text itself and so on is instead
truly truly a shameful relic
of a past that is inextricably linked to
not just slavery not just genocide
but the stupidity of this one generation
of really highly incompetent individuals
who were in no way prepared in no way
prepared
to take on the task of defining how that
country was going to be governed
for just the next 10 years let alone
the next 200.